# Conclusion

## Passing the Tests

Did #MLA16 pass [the Bechdel test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bechdel_test)? In a word, yes. Women mentioning or citing other women constituted 27.78% of all tweets. Of the 792 total tweets, 220 of them---almost precisely the total number of all men’s tweets (222)---were women writing about women. (By contrast, men tweeting about other men constituted only 6.94% of all tweets, whereas women tweeting about men constituted 18.18% of all tweets.) During these panels, women performed the bulk of the carework, ensuring that panels were summarized, works were cited, links were shared, and audience members and those not present in the conference were brought into the experience remotely. Women made sure that other women’s voices were heard. 

Did #MLA16 pass the DuVernay test? I think so---although this may be because the topic of these three panels each invoked some sort of carework or social justice topic. The disrupting panel, #s280, featured issues of race, while the pedagogy panel, #s411, emphasized taking care of students, while the repair panel, #s508, invoked it in the panel's very title. Tweeting diverse voices, whether it is measured by race, class, sexuality, able-bodiedness, or other factors, seems to be a priority of female tweeters. In general, the labor of female tweeters pushes each panel's Twitter stream closer toward the finish line to meet the standards of the Bechdel and DuVernay tests. When women or minorities present, female and minority tweeters are there to publicize and respond to their presentations. My favorite tweet of all three streams was one in which one woman-of-color tweeter cheered on the work of a woman-of-color presenter, which made me think of that _Field of Dreams_ adage, "If you build it, they will come:" When we build inclusive panels, we set the stage for inclusive academic social media.

## Advice for Academic Tweeting

Beyond the continued necessity to be conscious of building inclusive panels, my advice for the future is to continue these labors to represent minority and women voices on Twitter. However, do not restrict _all_ of your social media labors to taking care of the panelists, of the audience, and of other academics. Unless you genuinely enjoy pure reportage (in which case, thank you for your work!) and are not interested in other forms of social media participation, make sure you **take care of yourself as well**: [cite yourself more](http://www.eigenfactor.org/gender/self-citation/SelfCitation.pdf) and share more of your own ideas, reactions, and questions. 

Such self-carework is not selfish: it will also help the panelists develop their ideas, giving them more a more fully developed "peer review" experience that they can use to improve their future scholarship. It can indeed help you introduce other people to your own work as they read your take on the panel, but this does not have to feel like bald self-aggrandizement if your reactions are organically connected to the presentation at hand and are offered _as a constructive part of_ the Twitter community that arises around the panel. If a super-tweeter is busy working (and perfectly happy about doing so), let them do that labor, and show your appreciation by forming other kinds of tweets and participating in backchannel exchanges. 

At the same time---bearing in mind that I do not want to say, once and for all, that a certain mode of tweeting is always better than another---what is so important about this kind of carework is that you can support the scholars and scholarship _you in particular_ care about. If you truly perceive your role to be pure reportage during a particular panel, this is obviously a laudable goal, and it does not prevent you from taking on a far different role at other panels or other conferences. Perhaps there truly is a community that you want to take care of; indeed, regarding the DuVernay test, I'm sure that men and women of color are not waiting for this paper to be perfectly aware of their sacrifice and labors in ensuring that the voices of scholars of color are brought in. 

Above all, _all_ tweeters, do not let a perceived duty to document squeeze out your chance to comment, argue, connect, link, and intervene in the conversation. Panelists occupy a certain position of authority by virtue of being up on stage in front of an audience, so Twitter is an important way to diversify the voices being heard, both during and after the panel. As for male tweeters, you may want to take on more of the labor of sharing citations and bringing in more people to the Twitter feed. In addition to providing support for the scholars and scholarship that you find important, doing so may free up women and scholars of color for contributing in other kinds of ways to academic social media.

## New Concepts to Explore in Social Media

Looking back at this case study, I now see further work to be done regarding a few insights I had along the way: 1) the categorization schema I developed to analyze the content or rhetorical function of a tweet; 2) the spontaneous production of bibliographies during conference tweeting; 3) the use of tweeting to bring in people who are not in the room or yet in the conversation; and 4) the influence of super-tweeters on the behavior of casual and active tweeters. These are important issues that I hope can spur further research. For now, I will hazard a few conclusions about these issues. Regarding #1, I am still happy with the categorization schema I devised (metacomment; summary/quotation; citation; response/question; room climate), and I hope it can be useful to others doing research on academic twitter.

Regarding #2, I have already suggested that the _purposes_ of such a spontaneous bibliography differ from those of traditional ones (they allow scholars beyond the presenter to point the audience to sources), but how, precisely, are these resulting bibliographies similar to those that would be (or are) published by the panelist? What kinds of voices do they recuperate? Do they critique or support the paper being read? In my own experience, I react to what other tweeters in the room are doing; if there is a super-tweeter, I can rely on this person to pass along citations actively mentioned by the panelist, thus leaving me free to _add in_ new sources that I think might help the panelist or give the audience background information about the larger intellectual debate around the given topic.

Regarding #3, the "outsiders" brought "inside," how are these people brought in---mostly through direct call-outs through "@" or through the citational networks generated by the tweeters? Are scholars who have active Twitter accounts more likely to be invoked? Are open-access works more likely to be cited? In my own experience, I am more likely to bring in active Twitter users because I expect that I will have a better chance of receiving a response from the scholar being invoked if the person has an "@" to be pinged by. And I am more likely to link to open-access works (or to books that are relatively cheap on Amazon!) because I feel they will better help anyone reading the conference Twitter stream.

Finally, regarding #4, based on my interaction with this dataset, I would venture that super-tweeters allow other tweeters to vary their Twitter behavior without feeling that they have let down the panelist or any readers of the conference Twitter stream by neglecting to communicate a crucial point. I would also venture that super-tweeters encourage greater participation in the backchannel; their followers on Twitter know they can come to this person's feed to stay in the mix, and those in the audience can sit back and wait for the super-tweeter to say something that provokes them to tweet back to the super-tweeter. 

## Avenues for Future Research

To explore these questions, as well as improve the accuracy of my results, I would make quite a few changes if I ran such a test again. First, I would attend more panels in order to extend the dataset, although if tweeters knew in advance their tweets would be recorded _as_ gendered behavior, it might alter those behaviors. This larger sample size would increase the accuracy and statistical significance of my results, which at present hover somewhere between anecdote and evidence. Nevertheless, I think this case study usefully exemplifies new approaches to "small data" or "boutique data." I was able to explore a phenomenon I perceived during MLA16---an insistent though vague hunch that something was happening that I did not like---that I may _not_ have perceived had I been purposively amassing large number of data points. And that, of course, is one of my major recommendations: to stay in the moment, whatever that may mean to an individual conference-goer.

Second, I would track my two types of data (the genders of people tweeting and mentioned in tweets; the topic or rhetorical function of each tweet) _across time_. Doing so would reveal chronological trends, such as when different types of tweets wax or wane during a single panel or conference, or how influential tweets or tweeters change overall patterns in a given panel. Such chronlogical data is, of course, embedded in each tweet's metadata, and I could return to my data and transform my synchronic figures and tables into a timeline or video. However, this problem was neither in the scope of my original research question nor necessary for the theses sketched out in the Results section. Quite simply, this dimension of the data had not seemed relevant until after I had anlayzed my data and realized what questions remained.

Third, I would try to redesign the way I classify tweets to accommodate a more inclusive understanding of gender. I would examine the limits of the simple gender binary I have used (e.g., do tweeters really self-identify their genders, and are two genders really enough here?) and try to find a model that reflects the uses by, and specific affordances of, twitter for the LGBTQ* community. This might involve the circulation of a survey, or a far more closed, purposive experiment carefully designed with the help of an ally organization.

Finally, I would consider whether race could be a useful distinction to make in collecting and organizing this type of data (rather than consider race after-the-fact, as I must admit that I did)? What about the special case of women of color? Are they performing more of this carework, or different types of carework, than white women? Considering the undoubted influence of institutional racism in academia, listening to women of color on Twitter, retweeting them, and mentioning their work in your tweets, represents ways we can all perform carework for women of color in academia. Academic twitter, then, may contribute some positive marks for academia in terms of the DuVernay Test, as women of color tweet to ensure that digital scholarship by people of color is recognized and engaged with in ways that are more than cursory name-checks or token gestures of inclusion. The effort by women of color to bring in other female scholars of color was palpable especially during #s280, the [Disrupting DH](http://www.disruptingdh.com/) panel---during which the diversity of the audience (not only the panel as a whole) was explicitly noted. It seems quite likely, then, that this panel disrupted not just DH, but #DH as well.
