# Results

##Women out-tweeted men—by a lot.

During these three panels, women produced 570 tweets (71.97%), while men tweeted 222 times (28.03%) (see [Table 11](#modal:#table11)). In terms of doing the labor of recording what was going on in these panels, women produced 319 tweets that summarized or quoted from the panels, whereas men produced 124. In terms of providing citations to help those on Twitter find proof, articles, books, or websites related to the panel, women provided 86 citations, while men provided 17 (see [Table 13](#modal:#table13)).

Women presenters slightly outnumbered male presenters (9 to 8), which might at first seem to suggest that a greater number in women presenters correlates to a greater level of female participation on Twitter. Yet, at #s280 (the disrupting panel), with 2 women and 5 men on the panel, women contributed 87.14% of the total tweets (see [Table 1](#modal:#table1)). For #s411 (the pedagogy panel), with the proportion of men and women nearly reversed, with 4 women and 2 men on the panel, women contributed 78.47% of the total tweets (see [Table 5](#modal:#table5)). For #s508 (the repair panel), with 3 women and 1 man on the panel, women contributed 46.82% of the total tweets (see [Table 7](#modal:#table7)). 

##Female panelists are not underrepresented on Twitter. 

Both men and women were more than happy to tweet about presenters of the other gender, though women were particularly likely to mention women who were not presenting and women who were not present at the panel. Women quote female presenters in 144 tweets and male presenters in 114 their tweets, a difference corresponding significantly closer to the 9:8 gender ratio in presenters than male tweeters (see [Figure 9](#modal:#figure9)). Unlike women’s egalitarian dispensation of tweets naming presenters, men named female presenters in a whopping 41.89% of their tweets, but named male presenters only 17.12% of the time (see [Figure 11](#modal:#figure11)). Why did women not name female presenters as frequently as men did? Perhaps it is partly explained because women are more likely than men to tweet without any reference to a particular person (201 tweets by women versus 55 tweets by men), but this latter phenomenon may be due to the super-tweeter in #s280 (compare [Figure 9](#modal:#figure9) and [Figure 10](#modal:#figure10)). Still, considering raw numbers (totals, not percentages), women named female presenters in 144 tweets, but men did so in 93 tweets (see [Table 11](#modal:#table11)).

In terms of non-presenters, women tweeters use 19.30% of their tweets to bring in non-presenters (see [Table 11](#modal:#table11)). These tweeters mention female non-presenters 76 times, devoting 13.33% of their tweets to doing so, suggesting that female tweeters are very keen on bringing in women who are relevant to this conversation who would otherwise be left out (see [Figure 3](#modal:#figure3)). They bring in male non-presenters at a markedly lower rate than they bring in women---34 times (5.96% of their tweets)---but in raw numbers, this is twice the number of male non-presenters brought in by male tweeters. In terms of quantity, then, women are _over three times_ more productive in terms of broadening the conversation to both men and women who are not presenting or who are not in the room. 

However, it should be noted that in terms of percentages by gender, men are more than fair in naming female presenters and were slightly more likely to bring in new women (19 times in total) to the conversation than they are new men (17)---again showing that men in these panels were not at all intent on supporting other men over women (see [Figure 11](#modal:#figure11)). And, regarding both men and women’s tweets about non-presenters, female non-presenters were mentioned in 13.04% of all tweets, whereas male non-presenters clocked in at 6.56% of all tweets, so, in these three panels, we might say that male non-presenters were underrepresented. Controlling for the super-tweeter in #s280 (the disrupting panel) did not appreciably change these numbers (see [Table 2](#modal:#table2)). However, controlling for the super-tweeter in #s508 (the repair panel) showed that in that panel, tweeters overrepresented the male presenter, producing 7.38% more tweets than an egalitarian dispensation would (see [Figure 2](#modal:#figure2))---but this was by a slimmer margin than female presenters were overrepresented in other panels (#s280, the disrupting panel, produced 9.71% more tweets about female presenters than expected; for #s411 (the pedagogy panel), this number was 12.64% (see [Figure 1](#modal:#figure1)).

##Men were more likely to tweet meta-commentary, whereas women were more likely to tweet about room climate.

Regarding the topic, or rhetorical function, of tweets, men were twice as likely (8.56%) as women (4.21%) to devote their tweets to meta-commentary, which expressed procedural facts about the state of the panel: when the paper started; who was presenting; the full paper title (compare [Figure 5](#modal:#figure5) and [Figure 7](#modal:#figure7)). Women contributed 83.18% of the tweets about the room climate—posting 37 tweets about the size, quality, and comfort of the room or about the emotional atmosphere at the panel (see [Table 13](#modal:#table13)). This difference suggests a gendered division of labor regarding what kinds of observations about the event, beyond the substance of the papers, were perceived as interesting or important to record.

Men and women were equally as likely to provide summary or quotations that recorded the panel: nearly identical at 55.96% of women’s tweets and 55.86% of men’s. In terms of raw numbers, the gap is appreciable: 319 by women versus 124 by men. Women inserted themselves into the conversation by responding or asking a question about 5% less frequently than men did (18.25% versus 22.97%), though in terms of raw numbers, again, women responded or asked a question 104 times versus men’s 51 times (compare the numbers of [Table 13](#modal:#table13) with the percentages of [Figure 9](#modal:#figure9) and [Figure 11](#modal:#figure11)).

##Women were more likely to use their tweets to provide citations.

Women contributed 84.29% of the 103 total citation tweets---tweets that explicitly linked to sources that were either quoted by the presenters or were related to the topics at hand (see [Table 13](#modal:#table13)). They contributed an average of 28.26 citations per panel, compared with men’s 5.67. Panel #s280 (the disrupting panel) featured 50 by women and 11 by men (see [Table 3](#modal:#table3)), #s411 (the pedagogy panel) featured 20 by women and 2 by men (see [Table 6](#modal:#table6)), and #s508 (the repair panel) had 16 by women and 4 by men (see [Table 9](#modal:#table9)). Proportionally, tweets by men were citations 7.66% of the time, whereas women’s tweets were citations 15.09% of the time (compare [Figure 5](#modal:#figure5) and [Figure 7](#modal:#figure7)). 

Because they often name people not in the room, these citation tweets are works of care. On behalf of the presenters, they perform the bibliographic labor of providing proof or materials for further reading, and on behalf of people not present at the panel, they recover the names of scholars who contributed to the results, project, or argument being discussed. Combining the citation results with the non-presenter results, women are far more likely to bring in people not physically at the conference. (What were men tweeting instead? More meta-comments and responses/questions.)

##Tweeting was highly contextual and responsive. 

These tweeting patterns were partly contextual. The proportions of each rhetorical function of tweet varied slightly along with the type of presentation, the composition of the audience, and the individual habits of tweeters who were more active than others during a given panel. In #s280 (the disrupting panel), an unusual audience---one that tweeters felt had a low number of white men---resulted twice as frequent room climate tweets (compare [Table 3](#modal:#table3) to [Table 6](#modal:#table6)). Once an active tweeter (e.g., one who tweeted at least one time per presenter, but not as frequently as a super-tweeter) tweeted a response/question, the overall rate of question/response tweets would increase appreciably.

In #s508 (the repair panel), Dan Anderson’s [remarkable multimedia performance](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1NvjZ4I5Deg) evoked tweets that were harder to classify in terms of their rhetorical function: were they evaluative (response/question) or descriptive (room climate, meta-comment) or reportage (summary/quotation)? Tweets during Anderson's presentation were more likely to participate in two or more categories, mixing summary with response or citation with room climate. A creative presentation, it seems, generated more creative tweets. During #s508, which featured 1 male panelist and 3 female panelists, the panel yielded almost precisely the proportion of tweets about panelists that we might expect: 74.86% of tweets naming presenters were about female panelists (see [Figure 1](#modal:#figure1)). Broken down, when women named panelists, they named women 67.12% of the time while men did so 80.39% of the time. Even though I had expected the novelty of Anderson’s presentation to have resulted in a higher rate of tweeting about male presenters than female, it did not. That is, unless the super-tweeter’s tweets are taken out (in which case, the proportion of tweets increases from 25.14% to 32.38%, see [Figure 2](#modal:#figure2) or compare [Table 7](#modal:#table7) and [Table 8](#modal:#table8)).

##Super-tweeters may influence others’ tweeting behaviors.

The two super-tweeters in the three panels under consideration produced 204 tweets (25.76% of the total tweets). The super-tweeter in #s280 (the disrupting panel) contributed 120 tweets (31.50% of that panel’s tweets), while the super-tweeter of #s508 (the repair panel) contributed 84 (31.46% of that panel’s tweets). (See [Table 12](#modal:#table11) and [Table 14](#modal:#table12) to see the aggregate figures without super-tweeters.) The super-tweeter of #s508 (the repair panel) single-handedly negated other gender discrepancies than the one mentioned above regarding Anderson’s presentation. For example, without the super-tweets, male tweeters are less likely to provide summaries/quotations (down to 43.48% of men’s tweets from 55.86%) and more likely to provide responses/questions (up to 29.71% of their tweets from 22.97%) (compare [Table 9](#modal:#table9) and [Table 10](#modal:#table10)). And it was in the presence of a male super-tweeter than women tweeted summary/quotation at their lowest rate (only 22.85% of the total tweets, compared with 54.33% in #s280, the disrupting panel), in addition to their lowest rate of citation tweets (only 5.99% of total tweets, compared with 13.12% in #s280, the disrupting panel (see [Table 9](#modal:#table9)).

Women’s tweeting behaviors were more similar to those of the super-tweeters than men’s tweeting behaviors were: compare the similarities between [Figure 5](#modal:#figure5) and [Figure 6](#modal:#figure6) with the differences between [Figure 7](#modal:#figure7) and [Figure 8](#modal:#figure8). But with the super-tweeters taken out, women were less likely to provide the stenographical carework (summary/quotation, citation tweets) and more likely to inject their own perspectives (response/question tweets). In addition, taking out super-tweeters, the proportion of tweets by women that named presenters and non-presenters rose, suggesting that even one super-tweeter can free up women to do other kinds of Twitter labor than pure recording. Because the two super-tweeters, one male and one female, behaved quite similarly in terms of their dominance of the panel's feed (around 30% of the panel's feed for both of them) and in terms of the content of their tweets, it appears that male and female super-tweeters can equally encourage other tweeters to produce a wider range of tweets.  

Perhaps most significantly, as I noticed while moving chronologically through each session’s twitter stream in order to gather my data, during phases in the panel when a super-tweeter was especially active, everyone else’s tweets seemed to become more complex and active. A greater number of people are brought into the conversation, more citations are provided, and more tweets cross genres, suggesting that the labor of super-tweeters plays an important role in determining the kinds of labor that others (both male and female tweeters) perform.